---
layout: post
title: Platform first.
subtitle: What we can learn from India Stack?
cover-img: /assets/img/01-05-23.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/rocket.png
share-img: /assets/img/01-05-23.jpg
tags: [software, API, password, platform, standards, lessons, design]
---

On the 20th of April 2023, Starship's launch attempt showed us the incredible power that a rocket produces. The amazing 7,590 tf / 16.7 Mlbf thrust can lift to the Earth's orbit 150 tons of load which is produced by 33 Raptor engines. This was amazing to watch this monster climb to an altitude of 39 kilometers (24 miles). Long story short the amount of power produced by this giant rocket couldn't be sustained by the concrete platform beneath the rocket. Launchpad was shattered like an ice brick with a hammer. Pieces of cement stones flew over making severe damage to the rocket engine suspension and making a few engines to went off. This caused the rotation of the rocket and destruction due to extremely large forces acting on the construction in the stage of the flight when maximum speed is reached but Earth's atmosphere is still dense enough to be like a gel.

But this article is not here to speculate about the causes of the SpaceX Starship Rocket failure, even though I think space engineering failures are the way to reach success.

This article is just my personal opinion on the subject of India Stack and I would recommend reading this [“Internet Country”](https://tigerfeathers.substack.com/p/the-internet-country) article first. It is rather a long article so I will make the jump to the conclusion. The success of the Software Technology depends on the platform. As a platform, I mean the set of rules and protocols brought in the form of an API or microservices collectively acting as an API. 

The way India went in about 10 years for bringing the payment system to the ordinary citizen is incredible. Just imagine that in 2009 only 10% of the population had access to the Internet, while today it is much over 50%. The Indian Stack project allowed India to create single, standardized access to many favours of the Internet such as the banking system and India plans to use the same principles in the healthcare system. Great lessons were given from the developing country to developed economies.

What is for us in that cake? And what is the similarity to the SpaceX Starship?

Even if or when Internet 3.0 will become a common thing there is always some API there to glue all the apps together, wherever it is running, on the clued, on the edge, on a device such as a smartphone or a tv, it always will have a common API allowing to communicate. This API is the most important thing in the system as this is our platform to lunch all the rockets. If this will break or underperform even the best rocket will not be able to survive and reach the orbit. The platform that allows the system to communicate needs to be the most secure and the most robust part of the system. It cannot underperform either all the applications using it.

Our pace of cake is to ensure we are taking all the variables into the equation and if our model is really the secure model. We (the tech industry) tend to not pay enough attention to the security and simplicity of the solution we are building. And I know there are no simple things in life, but overcomplicated systems are there because of the wrong designs and rushing with functionality too. This is causing adding authentication and authorization as the last step, which may interfere with application functionality forcing us to make a choice. And guess what business is choosing in most cases? The secure solution that requires changes and effort or the less secure approach that allows the future at a lower cost. Wrong choices caused giant companies to go out of the market. 

There is no solution that can be practical and efficient in each and every application design to seal the communication and user authentication and authorization. The choice is always unique, but it is one of the first ones. If your application has not yet been built to keep your clients’ data secure then the whole great idea it offers is worthless or even dangerous. Make the educated choice and keep in mind that users create habits. These habits are hard to change and costly. If your clients log in with a single password then asking them to set up 2FA will be a long process. Even if the majority of the clients will use a new, more secure model it is still not secure until there are some of them left there. It is good to start with something that is the highest standard of security and have the head free to focus on building the product. You do not want to stop your business growth just because your application is insecure and needs patches. The market hates gaps and someone else will fill the need of the clients rather sooner than later. 

The whole system may communicate securely if corruption of the communication processes is kept to the possible known minimum. It means that one submitting the data will not be able to submit it anonymously. And anonymously does not mean that the system will know the person, it means only that the system recognizes the entity as a legitimate part that is allowed to submit data, by knowing the public key of the entity. A similar solution cannot be securely achieved by assigning hosts and ports as those can be compromised or redirected, strict rules make the whole system very inflexible. Today solutions like app [dockeryzation](https://dockerlabs.collabnix.com/) and [k8s](https://kubernetes.io/) are built on the principle of flexibility, sandboxing and easy, secure scaling. This trend is so powerful that taking it from the equation is probably a bad idea. Trusting that our systems are enclosed within the cloud architecture and are safe because of that isn't the brightest thinking too. For example, tokens securing communication can leak and needs to be known by the DevOps engineers. That is it allows the data to be bridged. The other thing is that sessions are kept long just because asking the client for verification may be annoying to them. And the longer the session token longevity, the weaker the security. 

Three growth needs good soil. Start with securing your solution and build your API to be a solid platform for your future applications.
